Worship, in its simplest form, is honor paid to a superior being. The idea is bowing down before a superior being as the Lord of our lives. Every single person worships something, whether it be a specific idol or even themselves. Our goal, as Christians, must be to worship our God—the God of the Bible—by giving Him our honor, reverence, praise, respect, glory, time, energy, and so on.

In Genesis 1:26, it says, “God said, ‘Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness…’” We are made in God’s image and were originally created to perfectly reflect that image. You can imagine that we would perfectly worship God in this state because we were operating exactly as God intended. So then, what were we created to do in worship? Let’s break down three practical ways we worship from Genesis 1–2.

The first revolves around being created in the image of God (Genesis 1:26). As image bearers, we can know, love, and intentionally commune with our God in a way that no other created thing can. Furthermore, we reflect His communicable attributes. Some of these include the fruit of the Spirit: love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control (Galatians 5:22–23). Practically, worshiping God as image bearers looks like acting like God by putting on these attributes.

Secondly, we are workers. God originally placed us in the garden to work it and keep it (Genesis 2:15). Back then, there were no weeds or thorns, so this was probably a creative task in addition to gathering the food needed for the day. Practically speaking, being workers today, although more difficult, looks like being diligent in school, working hard vocationally, serving in ministry and among our friends, and, perhaps most importantly, serving our families. However, it is not limited to these things. It can also include creative work such as making music, drawing, building, coding, and more.

Lastly, God created us to rest on the seventh, or Sabbath, day. Following the pattern of creation (six days of work and one day of rest), we were also meant to live this way. However, the Old Testament Sabbath is generally understood to be a ceremonial law specific to Israel. Nevertheless, the principle behind the Sabbath is still relevant to us today. We can practically apply the idea of the Sabbath by regularly pausing, reflecting on God’s goodness, and enjoying His presence, acknowledging that He is the sustainer of our lives. Some great ways to do this are by regularly praying, reading God’s Word, and assembling together at church and Bible studies. These do not have to be formal activities, either. We can worship God by taking a walk outside and enjoying His creation or even going to the beach and intentionally looking at the ocean in awe of the Creator.

Probably one of the best Bible verses to support this entire lifestyle of worship is Colossians 3:17, which says, “And whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him.”

Now that we have an idea of what worship is, heed this regarding true worship. John MacArthur warns our hearts by saying this:

“Now, believe me, beloved, there are many things that go on that people think are worship, but they’re not. There is certain kind of music that makes us feel like we are worshipping, because of the lilt of it, and because of the style of it. And it gives us a feeling of peace and maybe a few goose bumps. But the fact is that it may well be that that same style of music, that same mood of music with words that were totally without God could affect the same emotion in us. That’s not worship. Worship is that which is distinctly and only for God, and which while capturing the most profound of our emotions does so by the most profound divine truth.” (True Worship, Part 1, 16:00).

So, it could be that what we think of as worship is not actually worship. Let us remember this about worship: it is not about something we get but about something we give. Worship is self-humbling, and worship is profuse in its giving. If you are coming to church for the music, the preacher, or the stained-glass windows, that is not worship. That is simply trying to receive something from church, and that is not true worship. Worship is selfless giving to God. You can worship without any of those things because worship comes from your heart. This does not mean that a preacher who faithfully proclaims God’s Word cannot stir your heart to worship; however, it is not necessary.

So where does music come in? Music is just one opportunity through which we are meant to worship our God as the supreme Being and, ultimately, the Lord of our lives. (Remember that at the end of the day, we are all called to worship God continually in every area of our lives (Romans 12:2).) Therefore, the absolute best way to help our hearts move toward true worship in music is to sing theologically rich songs—songs that proclaim and declare who God is and what He has done.

I once helped TA a kindergarten music class with our church’s homeschool group, and that was the exact definition of praise music that we used: praise music declares who God is and what He has done. Nevertheless, we are often quick to settle for songs that are less theological simply because they sound good. Do not get me wrong—music is meant to sound good! Nevertheless, when it comes to worshiping our almighty King, we should always strive for good words before good music.

So, if there is one thing you should take away from this article, let it be this: not everything we think of as worship is actually worship if our hearts are somewhere else. When it comes to facilitating true worship, it is of the utmost importance that the music we choose, the things we watch, and the places we go foster the best possible environment for our hearts to worship God together. Let these truths sink deeply into your heart, especially if you have the privilege of leading others in the church.
